ZIPs 226 & 227 - ZSA Protocol: Transfer, Issuance and Burn (#680)
zcash/zips: zip-0227.rst

Varies  vIssueActions        IssueAction[nIssueActions] A sequence of issuance actions descriptions
32      :math:`\mathsf{ik}`  byte[32]                   The issuance validating key of the issuer, used to validate the signature
64      issueAuthSig         byte[64]                   The signature of the transaction SIGHASH, signed by the issuer
======= ==================== ========================== =========================================================================

Issuance Protocol
-----------------
The issuer program performs the following operations

For all actions `IssueAction`:

- encode :math:`\mathsf{asset\_desc}` as a UTF-8 byte string of size up to 512.
- compute :math:`\mathsf{AssetDigest}` from the issuance validating key :math:`\mathsf{ik}` and :math:`\mathsf{asset\_desc}` as decribed in the `Asset Identifier`_ section.
- compute :math:`\mathsf{AssetBase^{Protocol}}` from :math:`\mathsf{AssetDigest}` as decribed in the `Asset Identifier`_ section.
- set the ``finalize`` boolean as desired (if more more issuance actions are to be created for this Asset Identifier, set ``finalize = 0``, otherwise set ``finalize = 1``)
- For each recipient :math:`i`:

>     - generate a ZSA output note that includes the Asset Base. For an Orchard-based ZSA note this is :math:`\mathsf{note}_i = (\mathsf{d}_i, \mathsf{pk}_{\mathsf{d},i}, \mathsf{v}_i, \rho_i, \psi_i, \mathsf{AssetBase^{Orchard}}, \mathsf{rcm}_i)\!`.

Reviewer: Do the notes in the issuance actions encode \psi or rseed? This line seems to imply psi is explicitly encoded, but rseed is needed in the SigHash section below to compute the transaction hash.

Reviewer 2: Yes, that's right, we were to include `rseed` there, not `psi`. Thanks for pointing it out, we've updated it.

- check that every note in the `IssueAction` contains the same :math:`\mathsf{AssetBase}` and is properly constructed as :math:`note = (\mathsf{g_d, pk_d, v, \rho, \psi, AssetBase})`.

If all of the above checks pass, do the following:

- For each note, compute the note commitment as :math:`\mathsf{cm} = \mathsf{NoteCommit^{OrchardZSA}_{rcm}(repr_{\mathbb{P}}(g_d), repr_{\mathbb{P}}(pk_d), v, \rho, \psi, AssetBase)}` as defined in the Note Structure and Commitment section of ZIP 226 [#zip-0226-notestructure]_ and
- add :math:`\mathsf{cm}` to the Merkle tree of note commitments, `NoteCommitmentTree`.
- If ``finalize = 1``, add :math:`\mathsf{AssetId}` to the ``previously_finalized`` set immediately after the block in which this transaction occurs.

Rationale
=========
The following is a list of rationale for different decisions made in the proposal:

- The issuance key structure is independent of the original key tree, but derived in an analogous manner (via ZIP 32). This is in order to keep the issuance details and the Asset Identifiers consistent across multiple shielded pools.

> - The design decision is not to have a chosen name to describe the Custom Asset, but to delegate it to an off-chain mapping, as this would imply a land-grab “war”.

Reviewer: Wallet developers are probably going to be tempted to display just the `asset_desc` string to their users as the name for an asset, because it's the easy and obvious thing to do. That would be a security issue, because anyone could issue another asset with the same `asset_desc` and confuse those wallets' users into thinking they received the original asset.

Enforcing globally-unique `asset_desc`s would solve that, but then we would have to consider ideograph attacks, which we probably don't want to get into.

I think the ZIP should include something like "Wallets MUST NOT display `asset_desc` to their users as the name of an asset type." And maybe some other recommendations for how wallets should safely map AssetIDs to human-readable names.

It might be convenient to define an asset fingerprint, so that a bridge or whatever can say "Our wrapped BTC asset is `A17294418BD30DEFA1E229658DAE9D7D`" or even better if a user can scan that information into their wallet using a QR code.

Reviewer 2: We've added this recommendation in [this PR](https://github.com/QED-it/zips/pull/32)

See the `Concrete Applications`_ section for more details.

Requirements
============

- Any user of the Zcash blockchain can issue Custom Assets on chain.
- The issuance mechanism should enable public tracking of the supply of the Assets on the Zcash blockchain.
- Issuing or changing the attributes of a specific Asset should require cryptographic authorization.
- The Asset identification should be unique (among all shielded pools) and different issuer public keys should not be able to generate the same Asset Identifier.
- An issuer should be able to issue different Assets in the same transaction. In other words, in a single "issuance bundle", the issuer should be able publish many "issuance actions", potentially creating multiple Custom Assets.
- Every "issuance action" should contain a :math:`\mathsf{finalize}` boolean that defines whether the specific Custom Asset can have further tokens issued or not.

Specification: Issuance Keys and Issuance Authorization Signature Scheme
========================================================================

The ZSA Protocol adds the following three keys to the key components [#protocol-addressesandkeys]_:

> 1. The issuance derivation key, denoted as :math:`\mathsf{idk}`, as the name suggests, is the key that is used to derive the other two keys.

Reviewer 3: This acronym is not ideal because $\mathsf{dk}$ means "diversifier key".

- The Asset Digest could be used as a more compact bytestring to uniquely determine an Asset, and wallets could support clients scanning QR codes to load Asset information into their wallets.

Specification: Global Issuance State
====================================

Issuance requires the following additions to the global state defined at block boundaries:

- :math:`\mathsf{previously\_finalized}`, a set of :math:`\mathsf{AssetId}` that have been finalized (i.e.: the :math:`\mathsf{finalize}` flag has been set to :math:`1` in some issuance transaction preceding the block boundary).

Specification: Issuance Action, Issuance Bundle and Issuance Protocol
=====================================================================

Issuance Action Description
---------------------------

An issuance action, ``IssueAction``, is the instance of issuing a specific Custom Asset, and contains the following fields:

- :math:`\mathsf{assetDescSize}`: the size of the Asset description, a number between :math:`0` and :math:`512`, stored in two bytes.
- :math:`\mathsf{asset\_desc}`: the Asset description, a byte string of up to 512 bytes as defined in the `Specification: Asset Identifier`_ section.

> - ``vNotes``: an array of ``Note`` containing the unencrypted output notes of the recipients of the Asset.

Reviewer 3: Give a section reference for ``Note``.

Reviewer 2: Done

+-----------------------------+--------------------------+-------------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Bytes                       | Name                     | Data Type                                 | Description                                                         |
+=============================+==========================+===========================================+=====================================================================+

> |``2``                        |``assetDescSize``         |``byte``                                   |The length of the :math:`\mathsf{asset\_desc}` string in bytes.      |

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
|``2``                        |``assetDescSize``         |``uint16``                                 |The length of the :math:`\mathsf{asset\_desc}` string in bytes.      |
```
or use CompactSize. This table is duplicated between ZIPs 227 and 230; I'm not sure whether that's a problem but it should be called out if it stays like that.

Reviewer 2: Removed the duplication, included it solely in ZIP 230.

-----------------
The issuer program performs the following operations:

For all actions ``IssueAction``:

- encode :math:`\mathsf{asset\_desc}` as a UTF-8 byte string of size up to 512.
- compute :math:`\mathsf{AssetDigest}` from the issuance validating key :math:`\mathsf{ik}` and :math:`\mathsf{asset\_desc}` as decribed in the `Specification: Asset Identifier`_ section.
- compute :math:`\mathsf{AssetBase}` from :math:`\mathsf{AssetDigest}` as decribed in the `Specification: Asset Identifier`_ section.
- set the :math:`\mathsf{finalize}` boolean as desired (if more issuance actions are to be created for this :math:`\mathsf{AssetBase}`, set :math:`\mathsf{finalize} = 0`, otherwise set :math:`\mathsf{finalize} = 1`).
- for each recipient :math:`i`:

    - generate a ZSA output note that includes the Asset Base. For an Orchard-ZSA note this is :math:`\mathsf{note}_i = (\mathsf{d}_i, \mathsf{pk}_{\mathsf{d}_i}, \mathsf{v}_i, \rho_i, \mathsf{rseed}_i, \mathsf{AssetBase}, \mathsf{rcm}_i)\!`.

- encode the ``IssueAction`` into the vector ``vIssueActions`` of the bundle.

For the ``IssueBundle``:

- encode the ``vIssueActions`` vector.
- encode the :math:`\mathsf{ik}` as 32 byte-string.

> - sign the SIGHASH transaction hash with the issuance authorizing key, :math:`\mathsf{isk}`, using the :math:`\mathsf{IssueAuthSig}` signature scheme. The signature is then added to the issuance bundle.

Reviewer 3: @daira note to self: check whether explicit type declarations or consensus rules are needed here.

**Note:** that the commitment is not included in the ``IssuanceAction`` itself. As explained below, it is computed later by the validators and added to the note commitment tree.

Specification: Consensus Rule Changes
=====================================

For the ``IssueBundle``:

- Validate the issuance authorization signature, :math:`\mathsf{issueAuthSig}`, on the SIGHASH transaction hash, :math:`\mathsf{SigHash}`, by invoking :math:`\mathsf{IssueAuthSig.Validate(ik, SigHash, issueAuthSig)}`

For each ``IssueAction`` in ``IssueBundle``:

- check that :math:`0 < \mathtt{assetDescSize} <= 512`.

> - check that :math:`\mathsf{asset\_desc}` is a string of length :math:`\mathtt{assetDescSize}` bytes.

Reviewer 3: It could not fail to be if the IssueAction parses correctly. (All parsing is an *implicit* consensus rule.)

Reviewer 2: Removed this check, thanks

- retrieve :math:`\mathsf{AssetBase}` from the first note in the sequence and check that :math:`\mathsf{AssetBase}` is derived from the issuance validating key :math:`\mathsf{ik}` and :math:`\mathsf{asset\_desc}` as described in the `Specification: Asset Identifier`_ section.
- check that the :math:`\mathsf{AssetDigest}` does not exist in the :math:`\mathsf{previously\_finalized}` set in the global state.

> - check that every note in the ``IssueAction`` contains the same :math:`\mathsf{AssetBase}` and is properly constructed as :math:`\mathsf{note} = (\mathsf{g_d, pk_d, v, \rho, rseed, AssetBase})`.

Reviewer 3: "Properly constructed" is ambiguous. It's sufficient to say that it is a ZSA note as long as type declarations are given for the fields of a ZSA note.

Reviewer 2: Edited this

If all of the above checks pass, do the following:

- For each note, compute the note commitment as :math:`\mathsf{cm} = \mathsf{NoteCommit^{OrchardZSA}_{rcm}(repr_{\mathbb{P}}(g_d), repr_{\mathbb{P}}(pk_d), v, \rho, \psi, AssetBase)}` as defined in the Note Structure and Commitment section of ZIP 226 [#zip-0226-notestructure]_ and
- Add :math:`\mathsf{cm}` to the Merkle tree of note commitments.
- If :math:`\mathsf{finalize} = 1`, add :math:`\mathsf{AssetDigest}` to the :math:`\mathsf{previously\_finalized}` set immediately after the block in which this transaction occurs.

> - (Replay Protection) If issue bundle is present, the fees MUST be greater than zero.

Reviewer 3: The fee being non-zero means that there must be inputs which is what gives you replay protection, but just saying "(Replay Protection)" here doesn't make that clear. It should be explained in a rationale subsection.

Reviewer 2: Added a Rationale subsection to that section.

Rationale
=========
The following is a list of rationale for different decisions made in the proposal:

> - The issuance key structure is independent of the original key tree, but derived in an analogous manner (via ZIP 32). This is in order to keep the issuance details and the Asset Identifiers consistent across multiple shielded pools.

Reviewer 3: It looks like the ZIP doesn't actually specify how the issuance keys are derived, which makes this rationale confusing. If we want a SHOULD requirement on this then it needs to be in a specification section, not rationale.

Reviewer 2: Added the separate Rationale subsection, and moved this text there.

Abstract
========

> This ZIP (ZIP 227) proposes the Zcash Shielded Assets (ZSA) protocol, in conjunction with ZIP 226 [#zip-0226]_. This protocol is an extension of the Orchard protocol that enables the creation, transfer and burn of Custom Assets on the Zcash chain. The creation of such Assets is defined in this ZIP (ZIP 227), while the transfer and burn of such Assets is defined in ZIP 226 [#zip-0226]_. This ZIP must only be implemented in conjuction with ZIP 226 [#zip-0226]_. The proposed issuance mechanism is only valid for the Orchard-ZSA transfer protocol, because it produces notes that can only be transferred under ZSA.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This ZIP (ZIP 227) proposes the Zcash Shielded Assets (ZSA) protocol, in conjunction with ZIP 226 [#zip-0226]_. This protocol is an extension of the Orchard protocol that enables the creation, transfer and burn of Custom Assets on the Zcash chain. The creation of such Assets is defined in this ZIP (ZIP 227), while the transfer and burn of such Assets is defined in ZIP 226 [#zip-0226]_. This ZIP must only be implemented in conjunction with ZIP 226 [#zip-0226]_. The proposed issuance mechanism is only valid for the Orchard-ZSA transfer protocol, because it produces notes that can only be transferred under ZSA.
```

Specification: Issuance Keys and Issuance Authorization Signature Scheme
========================================================================

The Orchard-ZSA Protocol adds the following keys to the key components [#protocol-addressesandkeys]_:

> 1. The issuance master key, denoted as :math:`\mathsf{imk}`, is the key that is used to authorize the issuance of a specific Asset Identifier, and is only used by the issuer.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. The issuance master key, denoted as :math:`\mathsf{imk}`, is the key used to authorize the issuance of Asset Identifiers by a given issuer, and is only used by that issuer.
```

> 2. The issuance validating key, denoted as :math:`\mathsf{ik}`, is the key that is used to validate the issuance transaction. This key is used to validate the issuance of a specific Asset Identifier, and is used by all blockchain users (specifically the Asset owners and consensus validators) to associate the Asset in question with the issuer.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
2. The issuance validating key, denoted as :math:`\mathsf{ik}`, is the key that is used to validate issuance transactions. This key is used to validate the issuance of Asset Identifiers by a given issuer, and is used by all blockchain users (specifically the owners of notes for that Asset, and consensus validators) to associate the Asset in question with the issuer.
```

1. The issuance master key, denoted as :math:`\mathsf{sk}_{\mathsf{iss}}`, as the name suggests, is the master key that is used to derive the other two keys.

> 2. The issuance authorizing key is the key that is used to sign the issuance transaction, and is denoted as ``isk``. This key is used to authorize the issuance of a specific Asset Identifier, and is only used by the issuer.

Reviewer 3: The convention used in the protocol spec and other ZIPs is that byte sequence encodings are in monospace/mathtt, but other values are in mathsf.

Reviewer 2: We were discussing the convention (see [here](https://github.com/QED-it/zips/pull/20#issuecomment-1579125270)) since there were some inconsistencies in what I had earlier, and I suggested this since `ik` is byte encoded, and it felt cleaner to me to have both `isk` and `ik` with the same formatting. 

Thanks for pointing out the convention, we'll go through this again and make it consistent.

Reviewer 2: This has been updated in [PR#30](https://github.com/QED-it/zips/pull/30) and merged in.

    :align: center
    :figclass: align-center

    Diagram of Issuance Key Components for the Orchard-ZSA Protocol

Issuance Authorization Signature Scheme
---------------------------------------

> We instantiate the issuance authorization signature scheme :math:`\mathsf{IssueAuthSig}` as a Schnorr signature over the :math:`\mathtt{secp256k1}` curve, as described in BIP-340 [#bip-0340]_.
> We define the constants as per the :math:`\mathtt{secp256k1}` standard parameters, as described in BIP 340. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We instantiate the issuance authorization signature scheme :math:`\mathsf{IssueAuthSig}` as a BIP-340 Schnorr signature over the secp256k1 curve. The signing and validation algorithms, signature encoding, and public key encoding MUST be as specified in BIP 340 [#bip-0340]_.

Batch verification MAY be used. Precomputation MAY be used if and only if it produces equivalent results; for example, for a given verification key :math:`pk`, :math:`\mathit{lift\_x}(\mathit{int}(pk))` MAY be precomputed.

We define the constants as per the secp256k1 standard parameters, as described in BIP 340. 
```

(Putting secp256k1 in plain text font when used as an adjective, e.g. "the secp256k1 curve", follows both the Zcash protocol spec and BIP 340.)

The associated types of the :math:`\mathsf{IssueAuthSig}` signature scheme are as follows:

* :math:`\mathsf{IssueAuthSig.Message} = \mathbb{B}^{\mathbb{Y}^{[\mathbb{N}]}}`
* :math:`\mathsf{IssueAuthSig.Signature} = \mathbb{B}^{\mathbb{Y}^{[64]}} \cup \{\bot\}`
* :math:`\mathsf{IssueAuthSig.Public} = \mathbb{B}^{\mathbb{Y}^{[32]}} \cup \{\bot\}`
* :math:`\mathsf{IssueAuthSig.Private} = \mathbb{B}^{\mathbb{Y}^{[32]}}`

where :math:`\mathbb{B}^{\mathbb{Y}^{[k]}}` denotes the set of sequences of :math:`k` bytes, and :math:`\mathbb{B}^{\mathbb{Y}^{[\mathbb{N}]}}` denotes the type of byte sequences of arbitrary length, as defined in the Zcash protocol specification [#protocol-notation]_.

> The signing key generation algorithm and the validating key derivation algorithm are defined in the `Issuance Key Derivation`_ section, while the signing and validation algorithms are defined in the `Issuance Authorization Signing and Validation`_ section.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The issuance authorizing key generation algorithm and the issuance validating key derivation algorithm are defined in the `Issuance Key Derivation`_ section, while the corresponding signing and validation algorithms are defined in the `Issuance Authorization Signing and Validation`_ section.
```
